to finish on part of that was, if you're an American
unit, you only saw the Vietnamese in battle, near
battles, getting ready for battle, just after a
battle. You're going through an area. Yes, there
was the, I think, troop-wise, particularly,
other than a few gestures caught on, a few words for
certain things, a barrier. The big surprise was
how many Vietnamese spoke English. The children
would speak English, you know, called GI slang
English. The advisors would stay in an area long
enough, and a lot of them were second, third tour
people, who had been there, were back, that you
were more at home. In fact, we had some advisors who
everybody had to be fluent in French because they
worked with an artillery unit, and the Vietnamese
artillery was done in French. So you had second and
third languages you could converse in in a lot of
cases. A lot of our operators spoke other
languages that the Vietnamese would speak, and
you had one or two in common. And you weren't
this... Plus, after you stayed in the area, you
could go into the markets. You could go places. You
didn't have the feeling. You may have still been
isolated. Don't make that mistake. But you didn't
have this feeling of, I'm totally alone in this
town. If something happens, nobody's going to
help me. After you lived there a while, you felt
when it was. And the Vietnamese would say, no
operation today. We stay in the compound. You knew
the commons were doing something. They didn't
tell you. If you want to go on downtown, go ahead.
Remember, it's your risk. And you developed a, I
would say, a more personal relationship. You saw
the people in different lights. You saw them out
plowing the fields and some of the jobs I went
through. You went out and you worked with the rural
development programs and things. You worked with
them, so you were out there. And it wasn't this, you
didn't drive by at 50 miles an hour in a truck and
look out and see Vietnam. Dismount from the
helicopter and go into battle. That was the
difference. I didn't live in a wire compound. I was
in wire. But I was in a Vietnamese compound with
Vietnamese. We had our own cooks. We ate mostly
their food. We ate ours. Advisors were not
supplied with food. You acquired your food on the
market. So... This gave you contact. If you wanted
to eat your breakfast or whatever the hell you ate,
remember don't sit at the same table and vary your
time, otherwise you'll be a stat. You'll just come
up with statistics. If you get dumb and you go to
breakfast every morning at 8 o'clock, 8 o'clock, 8
o'clock, 8 o'clock, 8 o'clock, somebody's gonna
catch on and you go to breakfast every morning at 8
o'clock, shoot the suits down at 8 o'clock. So you
had to do that kind of a thing, but... Uh, you
weren't this, uh... You were constantly under
surveillance. You were always under
surveillance. You just got used to just...
There's a war on, everybody's got their spies,
both sides did. You tried to vary your routine
enough that nobody would nail you. Don't be dumb.
Uh, don't go to town by yourself. Don't go without a
weapon. Don't go without loading it. Uh, but I
worked in an area that you could drive... between
towns unarmed was that pacified normally it could
also you could drive into a thousand men force
crossing that area so it's just which card did the
deck turn up did you flip a joker or an ace you flip
the ace nothing's wrong you flip the joker we'll
see about it how did you cope with this with the
stress that was inherent in especially i guess
with the phoenix You know what's funny, and you
asked that at Air Force, if there's a battle on, you
don't feel it. Probably the biggest stress was
always trying to please the commander, and after a
while, you kind of got calloused. I did, and some
others I know worked around there did. We didn't
care.
Now, you got long-term, I guess, look at it and be
fair, we got long-term stress from the war. Nobody
knew about it then. I mean, naive enough, young
enough to... You lived over it, and that's all it
counted. You know, I got back with ten toes and
fingers. Did it bother you? No. Well, you know, day
to day in the advisory program, the biggest
stress, I guess, would have been in the U.S. Army
units where you didn't know if the phone was going
to ring at 3 a.m. or 6 a.m. Load up, Lieutenant, it's
time to go somewhere. Where is where? Get on the
chopper. We'll brief you. We'll brief you for 20
minutes. The order of battle people are here. The
interrogators are going. Here's your briefing.
Here's a briefing from the electronic warfare
groups, radio research, ASA.
You went. When you were going to battle, there
wasn't time to worry about it. After it was over,
most of the guys came back and just got them a good
nose full of drinking. It was go out, shoot up the
woods or get shot up, come in and drink. It was a
tension breaker. In true life, you want to go swim
in the ocean with the sharks, you couldn't. I don't
think, in saying, you know, how do you handle
stress, I don't think we looked at it that way. It
was just a job that had bullets involved.
I think a lot of it was not looking at it, but there
wasn't any program around, would you like to talk
about how you feel? Are you kidding? You talk about
how you feel and say it the wrong way, you'll, mm,
let's watch him. So everybody caught on, just
don't say anything. If you weren't looking at the
end of a bottle, that was your business. I'd be
ready to go at 8 o'clock tomorrow morning or
whenever. I don't think the Army had a plan for
that. It was just something that wasn't looked at.
At least I never thought about it. I'm not aware of
ever sitting down and saying, hey, let's have a
talk about stress. I think after operations that
went wrong or some of your friends got killed or
wounded, I think you felt emotional ups and downs,
but I never did really, if you want to sound silly,
associate that with stress. I'd sure like to go out
there next time and kick them be with the crew it
goes, you know, but I mean that was the thing there.
What did you think of the military leadership
during your days in Vietnam? You know, when you ask
what do you think of leadership, and I guess one of
the things working at the staff where you have a
two-star general, and then on a team where there's
a colonel, I think the leaders, and this is, of
course, looking in total retrospect, I think the
leaders sat in their offices too much. It's a joke
that goes and went in Vietnam. What other war could
you fight in if you were a commander from a
helicopter at 5,000 feet? You fly home and the
troops and the intelligence crew walks back.
I'm not saying they're incompetent. I don't think
that was the case, but I think something looking
backward, and it'll be true in the next war the same
as this one. You always fight the last war you
fought the best. You fight it again. We fought the
World War II model in Vietnam with a modification
from Korea. You know, we talk about how mobile are
we. Well, we'll give you a helicopter. It can haul
you anywhere. We put you on the ground. Let's see
you walk with 125 pounds.
We can get you from point A to B, the big spot. It was
moving you on the ground that 10 clicks was tough.
The leadership probably, in truth, ranged from
very good to bad. We had an Americal Division. One
of our assistant deputy commanders relieved for
failing to provide his troops enough water. I'm
not sure what I think of. Fill your canteen this
morning and carry two of them because you may not
have any more water until the shooting stops.
It's what a war is about. I think the leadership
probably got lied to also, which affects how I see
it. I've read that a lot of the The leaders didn't
want to, they wouldn't report bad. Oh, no, no, no.
You don't, no, no, no, no. Don't do that. You
reported, at least in some cases, what you knew the
boss wanted to hear. We developed the body count
game as an example of what you had to do. If your
promotion depended on how many men you killed, not
how good a leader were you, You got what they term
the ratio. You have to get your ratio of kills up,
Lieutenant. It's sort of like working on an
assembly line, turning out sets. You're doing a
fine job, but we don't need two sets a day from you.
We need two every 10 minutes. You've assembled
them perfectly. There's nothing wrong with them.
Now get the numbers up. Instead of saying, were you
good leaders or bad leaders? Were you lucky or
unlucky? It became, how many of them compared to
you as a fraction did you kill?
I'm not always sure the guys higher up knew what
happened out there. It's been said that they
followed the strategy of attrition, that that was
the only strategy. Oh, well, it was one of them. And
one of the reasons it was one of them was, how do you
measure success in killing an enemy army? Count
the bodies. It's sort of like, you see,
unfortunately it worked out was, They had an
endless supply of people, and we did too. It's like
going in a football game. You play with a sprained
ankle, a jammed thumb. Now you've got your second
thumb sprained. You've twisted your knee. How
much pain do you play with? The problem of counting
bodies was if it had been finite limits on each side
that was going to get there, it's okay. But by the
way, how do you decide when you've got a stack of
dead ends? The soldiers are not sure they are. You
don't kill civilians. Count them. One, two. How
many guns? Well, gosh, a couple.
Do you have to have, and we even developed a rule in
some areas you had to put your foot on the chest of
the dead man. Step on him if you want to call it that.
Count him. Because people lied. Sir, I think we got
about, and you fill in the blank. Pick a good
number. You see, you had just got chewed last week
for not having enough, so this weekend a firefight
away from everybody else, you still didn't get
enough, but Sarge, there ain't nobody ever going
to know but us. Send them 10. 10. The numbers were
suspect. Who got counted? You counted everything
that was out there. If it was dead. If it's dead,
count it. Hold on. There's also been a lot of talk
about careerism with officers. Well, I think
ticket punching was prevalent.
If you wanted to stay, you better look like a duck,
quack like a duck, walk like a duck. If you didn't,
you weren't going to be a duck.
And there's an elite inside the Army. An army
within an army, if you want to call it that. And they
always will be in any bureaucracy, and that's what
an army is. Any bureaucracy you have has the elite
inside of it. Some group in charge whose
definition of standards are the rules we all work
by. It may help you. It may hurt you. In this
instance, you were out of touch. I think the group
inside was out of touch. But it's the old game of how
do you reform something that size? A
well-intentioned reform turns into disaster
when you implement it. And one of the problems was
the criteria we judged lieutenants on. By the way,
anybody who got a rating in the Army
didn't take in personality conflicts. It didn't
allow for other things that may have affected
scores. And it became a game. If you wanted to stay
in, you had to do certain things at certain points
in your career. You had to. You had to command at
certain times. If you didn't, you would be a staff
officer forever. Don't expect to rise to general.
You had to find the firefight to get yourself well
decorated. Because that was a ticket punch to show
everybody above you, those below didn't count.
Don't worry about them. It's all the ones above who
look back and say, hey, look at this one. He walks on
water. I forgot to tell them it was January 1st in
Wisconsin, but that's okay. He's got the required
I was there. Click.
You had to know how the team played the game. Don't
be a maverick. Don't rock the boat. Boat rocking
could be discouraged. It could prove hazardous to
your health. But I think there's a trade-off out
there. If you did the best job you could, then you
took the lick however it came down. If it was good,
fine. If it was bad, so what? And to say something of
all the medals and all the money and all the
decorations you can put on a soldier, If he's
satisfied with himself and what he did, there's
nothing you can put on him. And if he's not, I don't
care what you hang out there. You can't make him
what he's not. And an old man in World War I
remarked, been to Vietnam and other places, said,
40 cents and all your medals will get you a cup of
coffee in a cheap restaurant. It's still true.
They're one sign of it. And some guys get them and
shouldn't have them. Some don't. Some do. It's
potluck dinner. It's what did your boss think of
what you were doing. Suppose your ratio was a
little low, lieutenants. Your boss don't
decorate you. Heck no. So get your ratio higher
than the other three lieutenants. And now you see,
suddenly, I knew it. I knew it all along. See, I told
you. If you just do what I said, see, you caught on.
He didn't catch on and learn how to play the game.
What's the boss looking for? Do I want shine shoes,
good haircuts? I don't want you producing. It's
quite judgment scale. We use a lot of shine boots
and haircuts. Someone said, don't have the guy in
front of you stop too soon because you could get
hurt in a traffic jam. But there was a lot of it,
sure. I think all armies work on it. If you look like
one, you act like one, you associate with one,
maybe you become one. I don't know. I'll leave it at
that. I think that's what it might be. For the first
time ever, fragging became a significant
statistic in Vietnam. We had, where I was, no
problem. I will say I was in places where in
official capacity it had happened. But I was not
there for any of it. We had a Marine unit near our
compound in July that somebody tried to get their
first sergeant. They didn't get him. He took the
whole company outside in their shorts, and he
found all the hidden grenades. But we simply
didn't have the problem. Most of ours, where I was
in the problem, were stupid accidents that we
investigated. Dumbness.
People blowing fingers off with cleaning rods and
rifles before checking to see if they were moved
around from the chamber. But we didn't have, where
I was and wasn't aware of it being an incident until
I came back, or near that time, I mean, yeah. It was
brought to our attention later, they didn't, hey.
But no contact with it.
So did you, back on to the kill ratio strategy of
attrition as a measure of success,
do you think that's an important statistic? I
mean, what effect do you think it had on the troops?
I mean, what effect, obviously, is it people
falling? Everybody lied. Everybody lied. I
shouldn't say it in quotes. We'll put it in quotes.
Everybody that everybody ever heard about lied,
but none of them ever did it themselves. Maybe the
way to say that. Never did it myself, but all my
friends lied. I probably just got an answer there.
But you see, it's something I can measure. What do
you think would have been a more appropriate
measure? That's the hard part. Counting bodies
was the easy part. If there's anything to count,
well, here's one and there's one. We didn't try to
judge the battles. Were they big units? Were you
outgunned? Were you overwhelmed? How did you do in
a specific circumstance? That wasn't. That would
have taken more judgment. And you don't want
subjective calls. You want something you can
measure that I can absolutely walk out,
Lieutenant, point my finger in your face as a
commanding general and say, you, Lieutenant, are
the finest lieutenant I've got in this division. I
wish all my lieutenants were like you. It was easy
that way. The hard ones to do is what happened if
your unit never went in combat? And the one time it
did, you lost three guys and bagged nobody. You had
a terrible kill ratio. You lost three guys and
didn't get anybody. Your whole career could have
been finished on that. The one contact you had. You
got lucky. You walked out there. The artillery
tube was laid on the spot you were on. Here they
came, and you killed 1,100 of them. Man, I wish
every platoon leader. It's the examples. It's how
we use the example of the kill ratio, I think, was
the bad part. I'm not sure measuring it or not
measuring is good or bad in itself. I think you need
to kind of keep up with it. But we made it the all or
nothing. You had to be the best every time you went
out. You had to walk on water no matter what the
temperature was.
OK. What was your opinion of the enemy?
Professional.
Doing the job. And I'm basically talking about the
North Vietnamese Army. At least compared in a way
to us, and I'm using quote marks, highly
motivated, believed in a cause versus I'm there
for my year in some cases. A lot of others, they were
just sent there as punishment. You acted bad in
North Vietnam, your father didn't do what we want,
so we shipped the kids south as punishment. It
varied. Their officer corps
and their staffs were probably as good as ours.
When
you get out into this game,
what do you think of the gorilla you caught
carrying a bag of rice? He got taken out of the
village at gunpoint. And not having a gun, if I'd
have been in his spot in that village, I'd have been
carrying a bag of rice, impressed into the
service. Gunpoint draft. Both armies used it.
South Vietnamese used it. The VC, the NVA, if they
needed a lot of equipment, move and walk in a
village, take every male with them. You carry the
rockets, you carry the equipment. As soon as they
finished portering this heavy job, they'd turn
you loose and send you home. They didn't want to
feed you either.
But the core of their army was pro. And I think
that's the mispicture we have. We painted
ourselves a picture of a stupid little guy in a
conical hat who can't do anything right. And we
were the only fools that bought the picture.
Self-deception. And I would think that was the
big, and I think the higher up it went, the bigger
that picture got. If you hadn't been there, the
only thing you had that said Vietnam was what it was
was reported across your desk. You know, and if
someone asked someone to describe the war in
Vietnam, it's impossible. Three corps with every
terrain feature you want, every level of
intensity of warfare, from guerrilla, from
sniping, from mining, to stand up and slug it out
with you in a set-piece battle. And we were there
for 20 years. Tactics equipment evolved. The war
remained a constant, and we kept counting
numbers. There's no way to describe it. It was
never the same in your place, two days. One day it's
a perfectly peaceful village you've driven
through a hundred times, and tomorrow you come in
and everybody in the world is personally down
there trying to get you. That's what it feels like.
And,
you know, the morale question we had, do you? And I
think both sides fought with a different set of
handbooks. We fought with one that held Americans
to a different standard, at least on paper, than
the other side employed. I'm not sure, looking
backward, that I would want it any other way. At the
same time, I think we need to be more realistic
about why are we there to start with. You know, one
of the things that evolved out of a lot of guys, if
you're going to fight a war, go to win and go stay
home. And I teach government and understand and
recognize the difference between a declaration
of war and an undeclared war. However, for the
people you send to carry out your foreign policy, I
think it would help if you had a clear objective,
and we never had a clear objective. It was do this
and do that and do the other. It's been said in
Vietnam, we didn't lose any of the battles. We won
all the battles and lost the war. We lost battles.
We got surprised. We got ambushed. We got killed.
Compared to what we did to the other side, we killed
thousands, if not millions. And one of the
questions was, if you want to look at Vietnam as an
exercise in strangeness, we dropped more tonnage
of bombs in Vietnam than we dropped in World War II.
But what did we bomb? We bombed bridges. We bombed
things that we thought would disrupt something.
You bomb the wrong targets because their army
didn't operate the way your army operated.
Everybody always assigns or ascribes to the other
person your characteristics, your creature
comforts, your habits. What if it doesn't happen?
You know, one of the things we didn't do, we didn't
break the dam above Hanoi and Haiphong and flood
the country. We didn't blow up the railway tunnel.
the Chinese had on the border region. We didn't do a
bunch of things, and I'm not sure, you know, what
the consequence. They didn't ask lieutenants, do
you want to go do these things, lieutenant? You do
what you're told. But there are a lot of things you
wonder, why wasn't something different done? Not
that you had a plan. Most of us didn't. Hi, here I am.
What's going on? Can I keep my backside attached to
my front side?
What was your opinion of the South Vietnamese body
forces, RFPS? Well, the Arvins fought well when
well led. But you had to recognize what caused the
Arvin problems was the commanders farmed them out
as servants, hired labor, made them buy their own
rations, stole from their own troops. The
soldiers themselves
We're no better or no worse than your own army and
the other side. It's what does leadership or lack
of leadership do to your army? I think that was the
problem, was the corruptness. Up the chain, not at
the very bottom. At the very bottom, I have nothing
but respect for all of them. And I fought with units
that ran, and I fought with units that stood. And it
hangs on leadership. You earn your pay,
Lieutenant. It's time to stand up. Anybody... And
we tell the joke, anybody could manage a company as
long as you got all the money and spare parts you
need. It's when you're out of money and out of
parts, let's see how good a manager you are. When
it's not going right is when you should judge
management, when it's tough. And I think the call
was, yeah, their army ran.
Called them a lot of things. A lot of the troops did.
I think it was easier to call them that from an
American viewpoint until you worked in the
advisor program and really saw what happened.
Once you were internal to seeing part of it, then
the picture changed why the guys ran. You now got
the answer to the question you never had as the
American unit. They didn't run because they
wanted to. They ran because they were out of
supplies or out of ammunition, out of equipment.
There were units that didn't work right. But the
area I was in, we didn't have that problem with
them. They had problems with stealing petty
stuff, chickens and things.
The Vietnamese solved that own problem in their
own judicial system. We didn't get into theirs.
You've already mentioned what you thought about
the tour of duty. And did you say that the
military's gone back to the... We are going back to
what's called cohorts, our fixed regimental size
units, things maybe with different names. But a
group of people will enter, serve, work together,
train together, fight together, be replaced
together. It's stability is what we're heading
back to. You think that policy had a... Can you
really measure the effect? Yeah, I think you can
measure the effect. I think you can look at Vietnam
and the next war you fight and measure that effect.
I think you can look at World War II. You see, both of
these things have a trade-off. If I send a unit, and
I want to use a National Guard unit for an example,
and this happened in Pennsylvania... If you send a
guard unit who was in the same town, trained
together, and you kill them all on the same day,
you've killed a town. But they work together.
There's other way you send 160 guys, 167 guys on a
plane, you dump them off in a unit. There's 167
strangers standing there. Who cares? There are
risks each way. I think the biggest... Gain is the
stability. And I think it far outweighs what
happens to one town or one group of people who've
worked together. I think you perform better if
everybody knows exactly what the other guy is
going to do when the shove comes. There's no
question. Old Smith's going to be out there
hanging on because he's always hung on. It's not
what is Old Smith going to be doing.
American firepower, did we use it effectively in
Vietnam? Did we just... Nah. We bound the wrong
things. We had the fire powers misutilized. We
used indiscriminate shooting. An example, we
have a thing called H&I fire harassment and
interdiction. You pick out a grid, they call the
intel types like myself, and said, you got
anything out there you'd like shot? We're going to
fire 400 rounds tonight. Just spray the area and
hope some fool walking down the road with his
bicycle and bag of rye steps into the incoming.
We had restrictions on where you could use this
immense firepower. Towns were off limits.
We prescribed a large set of circumstances.
I think they were noble in description. However,
the practical effect in the field was kill your own
men. Uh, before I left the advisory program, 1970,
we had a directive, uh, directive number one,
1970, MACV1 or whatever it was, that said we could
not fire on the enemy until fired upon, literally
that. If they're on one side of the road and you're
on the other and they don't shoot at you, you let
them come through.
my reply to that one will be yes sir we signed that
gentleman and now let's go fight a war
if you don't shoot them when you see them and i live
over it i want to have a chat with you because it's
just that's not at least my book how you do business
but the army made that policy you you had the
helicopters immense firepower do we use it we said
we can't use it here we can't use it there you can't
bring this to bear what we did was we ran the army by
political decisions. And let's be fair, all
armies answer to political leaders. In our case,
three layers of civilians, the president, the
secretary of defense, the secretary of the army,
and the other services.
So, lean back from the rock face. That's the
instruction that always creeps me out. I would
be... I don't have to finish that. But they always
say, lean back from the rock face. And I, uh-uh.